

Agnosticism is the view that the truth values of certain claims—especially claims about the existence or non-existence of any deity, as well as other religious and metaphysical claims—are unknown or unknowable. (page 56 in 1967 edition)
 

 

 
According to the philosopher William L. Rowe, in the popular sense, an agnostic is someone who neither believes nor disbelieves in the existence of a deity or deities, whereas a theist and an atheist believe and disbelieve, respectively. 

Thomas Henry Huxley, an English biologist, coined the word agnostic in 1869. However, earlier thinkers have written works that promoted agnostic points of view. These thinkers include Sanjaya Belatthaputta, a 5th-century BCE Indian philosopher who expressed agnosticism about any afterlife, 
 Bhaskar (1972). 
 
Protagoras, a 5th-century BCE Greek philosopher was agnostic about the gods. 
 
The Nasadiya Sukta in the Rigveda is agnostic about the origin of the universe. Patri, Umesh and Prativa Devi. "Progress of Atheism in India: A Historical Perspective". Atheist Centre 1940–1990 Golden Jubilee. Vijayawada, February 1990. Retrieved 2007-04-02.
 

 
 

Since the time that Huxley coined the term, many other thinkers have extensively written about agnosticism. 

==Defining agnosticism==
Thomas Henry Huxley said: Wikisource has the full text of the article here.
 
 

According to philosopher William L. Rowe, in the strict sense, agnosticism is the view that human reason is incapable of providing sufficient rational grounds to justify either the belief that God exists or the belief that God does not exist. 

===Etymology===
Agnostic () was used by Thomas Henry Huxley in a speech at a meeting of the Metaphysical Society in 1869 to describe his philosophy, which rejects all claims of spiritual or mystical knowledge. 
 
 

Early Christian church leaders used the Greek word gnosis (knowledge) to describe "spiritual knowledge". Agnosticism is not to be confused with religious views opposing the ancient religious movement of Gnosticism in particular; Huxley used the term in a broader, more abstract sense. 
 
Huxley identified agnosticism not as a creed but rather as a method of skeptical, evidence-based inquiry. 

In recent years, scientific literature dealing with neuroscience and psychology has used the word to mean "not knowable". Oxford English Dictionary, Additions Series, 1993 
In technical and marketing literature, "agnostic" can also mean independence from some parameters—for example, "platform agnostic" 
 
or "hardware agnostic" 

===Qualifying agnosticism===
Scottish Enlightenment philosopher David Hume contended that meaningful statements about the universe are always qualified by some degree of doubt. He asserted that the fallibility of human beings means that they cannot obtain absolute certainty except in trivial cases where a statement is true by definition (i.e. tautologies such as "all bachelors are unmarried" or "all triangles have three corners"). Hume, David, "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding" (1748) 

===Types of agnosticism===
A person calling oneself 'agnostic' is stating that he or she has no opinion on the existence of God, as there is no definitive evidence for or against. Agnosticism has, however, more recently been subdivided into several categories. Variations include:
;Agnostic atheism: The view of those who do not believe in the existence of any deity, but do not claim to know if a deity does or does not exist. 
 

 

 
;Agnostic theism: The view of those who do not claim to know of the existence of any deity, but still believe in such an existence. 
;Apathetic or pragmatic agnosticism: The view that there is no proof of either the existence or nonexistence of any deity, but since any deity that may exist appears unconcerned for the universe or the welfare of its inhabitants, the question is largely academic. Therefore, their existence has little to no impact on personal human affairs and should be of little theological interest. 
 

 
;Strong agnosticism (also called "hard", "closed", "strict", or "permanent agnosticism"): The view that the question of the existence or nonexistence of a deity or deities, and the nature of ultimate reality is unknowable by reason of our natural inability to verify any experience with anything but another subjective experience. A strong agnostic would say, "I cannot know whether a deity exists or not, and neither can you." 
 

 

 
;Weak agnosticism (also called "soft", "open", "empirical", or "temporal agnosticism"): The view that the existence or nonexistence of any deities is currently unknown but is not necessarily unknowable; therefore, one will withhold judgment until evidence, if any, becomes available. A weak agnostic would say, "I don't know whether any deities exist or not, but maybe one day, if there is evidence, we can find something out." 

==History==

===Hindu philosophy===

Throughout the history of Hinduism there has been a strong tradition of philosophic speculation and skepticism. 
 
 

The Rig Veda takes an agnostic view on the fundamental question of how the universe and the gods were created. Nasadiya Sukta (Creation Hymn) in the tenth chapter of the Rig Veda says: 
 

 
 

===Greek philosophy===
Agnostic thought, in the form of skepticism, emerged as a formal philosophical position in ancient Greece. Its proponents included Protagoras, Pyrrho, Carneades, Sextus Empiricus 
 
and, to some degree, Socrates, who was a strong advocate for a skeptical approach to epistemology. 

Pyrrho said that we should refrain from making judgement as we can can never know the true reality. According to Pyrrho, having opinion was possible, but certainty and knowledge are impossible. 
 
Carneades was also a skeptic in relation to all knowledge claims. He proposed a probability theory, however, according to him, certainty could never be attained. Protagoras rejected the conventional accounts of the gods. He said: 

===Hume, Kant, and Kierkegaard===
Aristotle, 
 
Anselm, 
 Williams, Thomas, "Saint Anselm", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
 
Aquinas, 
 

 
and Descartes 
 
presented arguments attempting to rationally prove the existence of God. The skeptical empiricism of David Hume, the antinomies of Immanuel Kant, and the existential philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard convinced many later philosophers to abandon these attempts, regarding it impossible to construct any unassailable proof for the existence or non-existence of God. 

In his 1844 book, Philosophical Fragments, Kierkegaard writes: Kierkegaard, Søren. Philosophical Fragments. Ch. 3
 

===Thomas Henry Huxley===
Thomas Henry Huxley
Agnostic views are as old as philosophical skepticism, but the terms agnostic and agnosticism were created by Huxley to sum up his thoughts on contemporary developments of metaphysics about the "unconditioned" (Hamilton) and the "unknowable" (Herbert Spencer). Though Huxley began to use the term "agnostic" in 1869, his opinions had taken shape some time before that date. In a letter of September 23, 1860, to Charles Kingsley, Huxley discussed his views extensively: 
 
 

And again, to the same correspondent, May 6, 1863: 

Of the origin of the name agnostic to describe this attitude, Huxley gave the following account: 

===William Stewart Ross===
William Stewart Ross wrote under the name of Saladin. He championed agnosticism in opposition to the atheism of Charles Bradlaugh as an open-ended spiritual exploration. Alastair Bonnett 'The Agnostic Saladin' History Today, 2013, 63,2, pp. 47–52
 
In Why I am an Agnostic (c. 1889) he claims that agnosticism is "the very reverse of atheism". 

===Robert G. Ingersoll===
Robert G. Ingersoll
Robert G. Ingersoll, an Illinois lawyer and politician who evolved into a well-known and sought-after orator in 19th-century America, has been referred to as the "Great Agnostic". 

In an 1896 lecture titled Why I Am An Agnostic, Ingersoll related why he was an agnostic: 

In the conclusion of the speech he simply sums up the agnostic position as: 

===Bertrand Russell===
Bertrand Russell
Bertrand Russell's pamphlet, Why I Am Not a Christian, based on a speech delivered in 1927 and later included in a book of the same title, is considered a classic statement of agnosticism. 

 
He calls upon his readers to "stand on their own two feet and look fair and square at the world with a fearless attitude and a free intelligence". 

In 1939, Russell gave a lecture on The existence and nature of God, in which he characterized himself as an atheist. He said: 

However, later in the same lecture, discussing modern non-anthropomorphic concepts of God, Russell states: Collected Papers, Vol. 10, p.258 

In Russell's 1947 pamphlet, Am I An Atheist Or An Agnostic? (subtitled A Plea For Tolerance In The Face Of New Dogmas), he ruminates on the problem of what to call himself: 
 
 

In his 1953 essay, What Is An Agnostic? Russell states: 
 
 

Later in the essay, Russell adds: 

===Leslie Weatherhead===

In 1965 Christian theologian Leslie Weatherhead published The Christian Agnostic, in which he argues: 
 
 

Although radical and unpalatable to conventional theologians, Weatherhead's agnosticism falls far short of Huxley's, and short even of weak agnosticism: 

===Charles Darwin===
 Charles Darwin

Raised in a religious environment, Charles Darwin studied to be an Anglican clergyman. While eventually doubting parts of his faith, Darwin continued to help in church affairs, even while avoiding church attendance. Darwin stated that it would be "absurd to doubt that a man might be an ardent theist and an evolutionist". Letter 12041 – Darwin, C. R. to Fordyce, John, 7 May 1879 Darwin's Complex loss of Faith The Guardian 17 September 2009 Although reticent about his religious views, in 1879 he wrote that "I have never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God. – I think that generally ... an agnostic would be the most correct description of my state of mind." 

==Demographics==
Percentage of people in various European countries who said: "I don't believe there is any sort of spirit, God or life force." (2005) 

Demographic research services normally do not differentiate between various types of non-religious respondents, so agnostics are often classified in the same category as atheists or other non-religious people. 

A 2010 survey published in Encyclopædia Britannica found that the non-religious people or the agnostics made up about 9.6% of the world's population. 
 
A November–December 2006 poll published in the Financial Times gives rates for the United States and five European countries. The rates of agnosticism in the United States were at 14%, while the rates of agnosticism in the European countries surveyed were considerably higher: Italy (20%), Spain (30%), Great Britain (35%), Germany (25%), and France (32%). 

A study conducted by the Pew Research Center found that about 16% of the world's people, the third largest group after Christianity and Islam, have no religious affiliation. 
 
According to a 2012 report by the Pew Research Center, agnostics made up 3.3% of the US adult population. 
 
In the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, conducted by the Pew Research Center, 55% of agnostic respondents expressed "a belief in God or a universal spirit", 
 
whereas 41% stated that they thought that they felt a tension "being non-religious in a society where most people are religious". 

Proportion of atheists and agnostics around the world.

Other studies have placed the estimated percentage of atheists, agnostics, and other nonbelievers in a personal god as low as single digits in Poland, Romania, Cyprus, and some other European countries. in 
 
According to the 2011 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 22% of Australians have "no religion", a category that includes agnostics. 

 
Between 64% and 65% 
 
of Japanese and up to 81% 
 
of Vietnamese are atheists, agnostics, or do not believe in a god. An official European Union survey reported that 3% of the EU population is unsure about their belief in a god or spirit. 

==Criticism==
Agnosticism is criticized from a variety of standpoints. Some religious thinkers see agnosticism as limiting the mind's capacity to know reality to materialism. Some atheists criticize the use of the term agnosticism as functionally indistinguishable from atheism; this results in frequent criticisms of those who adopt the term as avoiding the 'atheist label'. 

Some thinkers and philosophers deny the validity of agnosticism, seeing it as a limitation of man's capacity to know the reality, by asserting that human intelligence has a non-material, spiritual element. They affirm that "not being able to see or hold some specific thing does not necessarily negate its existence," using gravity, entropy, reason and thought as examples. 

===Theistic===
Theistic critics claim that agnosticism is impossible in practice, since a person can live only either as if God did not exist (etsi deus non daretur), or as if God did exist (etsi deus daretur). 

 

 
 

Religious scholars such as Laurence B. Brown criticize the misuse of the word Agnosticism, claiming that it has become one of the most misapplied terms in metaphysics. Brown raises the question, "You claim that nothing can be known with certainty ... how, then, can you be so sure?" 
 
 

====Christian====
According to Joseph Ratzinger, strong agnosticism in particular limits contradicts itself in affirming the power of reason to know scientific truth. He blames the exclusion of reasoning from religion and ethics for dangerous pathologies such as crimes against humanity and ecological disasters. 
 

 
Benedict XVI, Address at the University of Regensburg 2006
 
"Agnosticism", said Ratzinger, "is always the fruit of a refusal of that knowledge which is in fact offered to man ... The knowledge of God has always existed". He asserted that agnosticism is a choice of comfort, pride, dominion, and utility over truth, and is opposed by the following attitudes: the keenest self-criticism, humble listening to the whole of existence, the persistent patience and self-correction of the scientific method, a readiness to be purified by the truth. 

The Catholic Church sees merit in examining what it calls Partial Agnosticism, specifically those systems that "do not aim at constructing a complete philosophy of the unknowable, but at excluding special kinds of truth, notably religious, from the domain of knowledge". 
 
However, the Church is historically opposed to a full denial of the capacity of human reason to know God. The Council of the Vatican, relying on biblical scripture, declares, "God, the beginning and end of all, can, by the natural light of human reason, be known with certainty from the works of creation` 

Christian Philosopher Blaise Pascal argued that even if there were truly no evidence for God, agnostics should consider what is now known as Pascal's Wager: the infinite expected value of acknowledging God is always greater than the finite expected value of not acknowledging his existence, and thus it is a safer "bet" to choose God. 

Peter Kreeft and Ronald Tacelli cited 20 arguments for God's existence, Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God, from the Handbook of Christian Apologetics by Peter Kreeft and Fr. Ronald Tacelli, SJ, Intervarsity Press, 1994.
 
asserting that any 'demand' for evidence testable in a laboratory is in effect asking God, the supreme being, to become man's servant. 

===Atheistic===
According to Richard Dawkins, a distinction between agnosticism and atheism is unwieldy and depends on how close to zero a person is willing to rate the probability of existence for any given god-like entity. About himself, Dawkins continues, "I am agnostic only to the extent that I am agnostic about fairies at the bottom of the garden." The God Delusion p. 74 
Dawkins also identifies two categories of agnostics: Temporary Agnostics in Practice (TAPs), and Permanent Agnostics in Principle (PAPs). Dawkins considers temporary agnosticism an entirely reasonable position, but views permanent agnosticism as "fence-sitting, intellectual cowardice". The God Delusion p. 70 

==Related concepts==
Ignosticism is the view that a coherent definition of a deity must be put forward before the question of the existence of a deity can be meaningfully discussed. If the chosen definition is not coherent, the ignostic holds the noncognitivist view that the existence of a deity is meaningless or empirically untestable. 

A.J. Ayer, Theodore Drange, and other philosophers see both atheism and agnosticism as incompatible with ignosticism on the grounds that atheism and agnosticism accept "a deity exists" as a meaningful proposition that can be argued for or against. Ayer, Language, 115: "There can be no way of proving that the existence of a God ... is even probable. ... For if the existence of such a god were probable, then the proposition that he existed would be an empirical hypothesis. And in that case it would be possible to deduce from it, and other empirical hypotheses, certain experimental propositions which were not deducible from those other hypotheses alone. But in fact this is not possible." Drange, Atheism 

==See also==

==References==
Notes

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Albert Einstein on Religion Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Why I Am An Agnostic by Robert G. Ingersoll, .
* Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Agnosticism
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
* Agnosticism from INTERS – Interdisciplinary Encyclopedia of Religion and Science
* Agnosticism – from ReligiousTolerance.org
* What do Agnostics Believe? – A Jewish perspective
* Fides et Ratio – the relationship between faith and reason Karol Wojtyla 
* For a utilitarian analysis of religion, see The (F)Utility of Religion: Who Needs God(s)?–A Prospective Bible for Non-Believers at http://bradmusil.kramernet.org
* The Natural Religion by Dr Brendan Connolly, 2008
* 
* 
* 
* 

 



